This many then shall die.
Their names are prick'd.
Your brother too must die;consent you, Lepidus?
I do consent--
Prick him down, Antony.
Upon condition Publius shall notlive,
who is your sister's son, MarkAntony.
He shall not live; look, with aspot I damn him.
But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar'shouse, fetch the will hither,
and we shall determine how tocut off some charge in legacies.
What, shall I find you here?
Or here, or at the Capitol.
This is a slight unmeritableman, meet to be sent on errands.
Is it fit, the three-fold worlddivided,
he should stand one of the threeto share it?
So you thought him,
and took his voice who should beprick'd to die
in our black sentence andproscription.
Octavius, I have seen more daysthan you,
and though we lay these honorson this man
to ease ourselves of diversslanderous loads,
he shall but bear them as theass bears gold,
to groan and sweat under thebusiness,
either led or driven, as wepoint the way;
and having brought our treasurewhere we will,
then take we down his load andturn him off,
like to the empty ass, to shakehis ears and graze in commons.
You may do your will, but he's atried and valiant soldier.
So is my horse, Octavius,
and for that I do appoint himstore of provender?
It is a creature that I teach tofight, to wind,
to stop, to run directly on,
and, in some taste, is Lepidusbut so:
he must be taught, and train'd,and bid go forth;
a barren-spirited fellow, onethat feeds on objects, arts,
and imitations, which, out ofuse and staled by other men,
begin his fashion.
Do not talk of him but as aproperty.
Now, Octavius...
listen great things.
Brutus and Cassius are levyingpowers;
we must straight make head;
therefore let our alliance becombined,
our best friends made, our meansstretch'd;
and let us presently go sit incouncil,
how covert matters may be bestdisclosed,
and open perils surest answered.
Let us do so, for we are at thestake,
and bay'd about with manyenemies;
and some that smile have intheir hearts, I fear,
millions of mischiefs.
What now, Lucilius, is Cassiusnear?
He is at hand,
and Pindarus is come to do yousalutation from his master.
He greets me well.
Your master, Pindarus, in hisown change, or by ill officers,
hath given me some worthy causeto wish things done undone;
but if he be at hand, I shall besatisfied.
I do not doubt but that my noblemaster
will appear such as he is, fullof regard and honor.
He is not doubted.
A word, Lucilius.
How he received you?
Let me be resolved.
With courtesy and with respectenough,
but not with such familiarinstances,
nor with such free and friendlyconference,
as he hath used of old.
Thou hast described a hot friendcooling.
Ever note, Lucilius, when lovebegins to sicken and decay
it useth an enforced ceremony.
There are no tricks in plain andsimple faith;
but hollow men, like horses hotat hand,
make gallant show and promise oftheir mettle;
but when they should endure thebloody spur,
they fall their crests and likedeceitful jades
sink in the trial.
Comes his army on?
They meant his night in Sard isto be quarter'd;
the greater part, the horse ingeneral,
are come with Cassius.
Hark, he is arrived.
March gently on to meet him.
Stand, ho.
Speak the word along.
Stand ho!
Most noble brother, you havedone me wrong.
Judge me, you gods.
Wrong I mine enemies?
And, if not so, how should Iwrong a brother?
Brutus, this sober form of yourshides wrongs,
and when you do them--
Cassius, be content, speak yourgriefs softly,
I do know you well.
Before the eyes of both ourarmies here,
which should perceive nothingbut love from us,
let us not wrangle.
Bid them move away; then in mytent, Cassius,
enlarge your griefs, and I willgive you audience.
Pindarus, bid our commanderslead their charges
off a little from this ground.
Lucilius, do you the like, andlet no man come to our tent
till we have done ourconference.
Lucius and Titinius, guard ourdoor.
That you have wrong'd me dothappear in this:
you have condemn'd and notedLucius Pella
for taking bribes here of theSardians,
wherein my letters, praying onhis side,
because I knew the man, wereslighted off.
You wrong'd yourself to write insuch a case.
In such a time as this it is notmeet
that every nice offense shouldbear his comment.
Let me tell you, Cassius, youyourself are much condemn'd
to have an itching palm,
to sell and mart your officesfor gold to undeservers.
I an itching palm?
You know that you are Brutusthat speaks this,
or, by the gods, this speechwere else your last.
The name of Cassius honors thiscorruption,
and chastisement doth thereforehide his head.
Chastisement?
Remember March, the ides ofMarch remember.
Did not great Julius bleed forjustice' sake?
What villain touch'd his body,
that did stab, and not forjustice?
What, shall one of us,
that struck the foremost man ofall this world
but for supporting robbers,
shall we now contaminate ourfingers with base bribes
and sell the mighty space of ourlarge honors
for so much trash as may begrasped thus?
By the gods, I had rather be adog, and bay the moon,
than such a Roman.
Brutus, bait not me, I'll notendure it.
You forget yourself to hedge mein.
I am a soldier, I, older inpractice,
abler than yourself to makeconditions.
Go to, you are not, Cassius.
I am.
I say you are not.
Urge me no more, I shall forgetmyself;
have mind upon your health,tempt me no farther.
Away, slight man.
Is't possible?
Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way and room to yourrash choler?
Shall I be frighted when amadman stares?
O gods, ye gods!
Must I endure all this?
All this?
Ay, more!
Fret till your proud heartbreak.
Go show your slaves how cholericyou are,
and make your bondmen tremble.
Must I bouge?
Must I observe you?
Must I stand and crouch underyour testy humor?
By the gods, you shall digestthe venom of your spleen,
though it do split you, for,from this day forth,
I'll use you for my mirth, yea,for my laughter,
when you are waspish.
Is it come to this?
You say you are the bettersoldier:
let it appear so, make yourvaunting true,
and it shall please me well.
For mine own part, I shall beglad to learn of noble men.
You wrong me every way, youwrong me, Brutus.
I said, an elder soldier, not abetter.
Did I say "better"?
If you did, I care not.
When Caesar lived, he durst notthus have moved me.
Peace, peace.
You durst not so have temptedhim.
I durst not?
No.
What, durst not tempt him?
For your life you durst not.
Do not presume too much upon mylove;
I may do that I shall be sorryfor.
You have done that you should besorry for.
There is no terror, Cassius, inyour threats,
for I am arm'd so strong inhonesty,
that they pass by me as the idlewind
which I respect not.
I did send to you for certainsums of gold,
which you denied me, for I canraise no money by vile means.
By heaven, I had rather coin myheart
and drop my blood for drachmas
than to wring from the hardhands of peasants
their vile trash by anyindirection.
I did send to you for gold topay my legions,
which you denied me.
Was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answer'd CaiusCassius so?
When Marcus Brutus grows socovetous
to lock such rascal countersfrom his friends,
be ready, gods, with all yourthunderbolts,
Dash him to pieces.
I denied you not.
You did!
I did not!
He was but a fool that broughtmy answer back.
Brutus hath rived my heart.
A friend should bear hisfriend's infirmities,
but Brutus makes mine greaterthan they are.
I do not, till you practise themon me.
You love me not.
I do not like your faults.
A friendly eye could never seesuch faults.
A flatterer's would not,
though they do appear as huge ashigh Olympus.
Come, Antony, and youngOctavius, come,
revenge yourselves alone onCassius,
for Cassius is aweary of theworld:
hated by one he loves; braved byhis brother;
check'd like a bondman; all hisfaults observed,
set in a notebook, learn'd andconn'd by rote,
to cast into my teeth.
O, I could weep my spirit frommine eyes!
There is my dagger, and here mynaked breast;
within, a heart dearer thanPluto's mine, richer than gold.
If that thou beest a Roman, takeit forth;
I, that denied thee gold, willgive my heart.
Strike, as thou didst at Caesar!
For I know, when thou didst hatehim worst,
thou lovedst him better thanever thou lovedst Cassius.
Sheathe your dagger.
Be angry when you will, it shallhave scope;
do what you will, dishonor shallbe humor.
O Cassius, you are yoked with alamb,
that carries anger as the flintbears fire,
who, much enforced, shows ahasty spark
and straight is cold again.
Hath Cassius lived
to be but mirth and laughter tohis Brutus,
when grief and bloodill-temper'd vexeth him?
When I spoke that, I wasill-temper'd too.
Do you confess so much?
Give me your hand.
And my heart too.
O Brutus.
What's the matter?
Have not you love enough to bearwith me
when that rash humor which mymother gave me
makes me forgetful?
Yes, Cassius, and fromhenceforth,
when you are overearnest withyour Brutus,
he'll think your mother chides,and leave you so.
Let me go in to see thegenerals.
There is some grudge between'em,
'tis not meet they be alone.
You shall not come to them.
Nothing but death shall stay me.
How now, what's the matter?
For shame, you generals.
What do you mean?
Love, and be friends, as twosuch men should be;
for I have seen more years, I'msure, than ye.
How vilely doth this cynicrhyme.
Get you hence, saucy fellow,hence.
Bear with him, Brutus; 'tis hisfashion.
I'll know his humor when heknows his time.
What should the wars do withthese jigging fools?
Companion, hence.
Away, away, be gone.
Lucilius and Titinius, bid thecommanders
prepare to lodge their companiestonight.
And come yourselves
and bring Messala with youimmediately to us.
Lucius, a bowl of wine.
I did not think you could havebeen so angry.
O Cassius, I am sick of manygriefs.
Of your philosophy you make nouse,
if you give place to accidentalevils.
No one bears sorrow better.
Portia is dead.
Portia?
She is dead.
How 'scaped I killing when Icross'd you so?
O insupportable and touchingloss.
Upon what sickness?
Impatient of my absence, andgrief that young Octavius
with Mark Antony have madethemselves so strong--
for with her death that tidingscame--
with this she fell distract,and, her attendants absent,
swallow'd fire.
And died so?
Even so.
O ye immortal gods.
Speak no more of her.
Give me a bowl of wine.
In this I bury all unkindness,Cassius.
My heart is thirsty for thatnoble pledge.
Fill, Lucius, till the wineo'erswell the cup;
I cannot drink too much ofBrutus' love.
Come in, Titinius.
Welcome, good Messala.
Now sit we close about thistaper here,
and call in question ournecessities.
Portia, art thou gone?
No more, I pray you.
Messala, I have here receivedletters that young Octavius
with Mark Antony come down uponus with a mighty power,
bending their expedition towardPhilippi.
Myself have letters of theselfsame tenure.
With what addition?
That by proscription and billsof outlawry
Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
have put to death an hundredsenators.
Therein our letters do not wellagree;
mine speak of seventy senators
that died by theirproscriptions, Cicero being one.
Cicero one?
Cicero is dead, and by thatorder of proscription.
Had you your letters from yourwife, my lord?
No, Messala.
Nor nothing in your letters writof her?
Nothing, Messala.
That, methinks, is strange.
Why ask you?
Hear you aught of her in yours?
No, my lord.
Now, as you are a Roman, tell metrue.
Then like a Roman bear the truthI tell:
for certain she is dead, and bystrange manner.
Why, farewell, Portia.
We must die, Messala.
With meditating that she mustdie once
I have the patience to endure itnow.
Even so great men great lossesshould endure.
I have as much of this in art asyou,
but yet my nature could not bearit so.
Well, to our work alive.
What do you think of marching toPhilippi presently?
I do not think it good.
Your reason?
This it is: 'tis better theenemy seek us;
so shall he waste his means,weary his soldiers,
doing himself offense, whilst welying still are full of rest,
defense, and nimbleness.
Good reasons must of force giveplace to better.
The people 'twixt Philippi andthis ground
do stand but in a forcedaffection,
for they have grudged uscontribution.
The enemy, marching along bythem,
by them shall make a fullernumber up,
come on refresh'd, new-added,and encouraged;
from which advantage shall wecut him off
if at Philippi we do face himthere,
these people at our back.
- Hear me, good brother. - Underyour pardon.
You must note beside
that we have tried the utmost ofour friends,
our legions are brim-full, ourcause is ripe:
the enemy increaseth every day;
we, at the height, are ready todecline.
There is a tide in the affairsof men
which taken at the flood leadson to fortune;
omitted, all the voyage of theirlife
is bound in shallows and inmiseries.
On such a full sea are we nowafloat,
and we must take the currentwhen it serves,
or lose our ventures.
Then, with your will, go on;
we'll along ourselves and meetthem at Philippi.
The deep of night is crept uponour talk,
and nature must obey necessity,
which we will niggard with alittle rest.
There is no more to say?
No more.
Good night.
Early tomorrow will we rise andhence.
Farewell, good Messala; goodnight, Titinius;
Good night, lord Brutus.
Good night, Lord Brutus.
Noble, noble Cassius, good nightand good repose.
O my dear brother.
This was an ill beginning of thenight.
Never come such division 'tweenour souls.
Let it not, Brutus.
Everything is well.
Good night, my lord.
Good night, good brother.
Give me the gown.
Where is thy instrument?
Here in the tent.
What, thou speak'st drowsily?
Poor knave, I blame thee not,thou art o'erwatch'd.
Call Claudius and some other ofmy men,
I'll have them sleep on cushionsin my tent.
Varro and Claudius.
Calls my lord?
I pray you, sirs, lie in my tentand sleep;
it may be I shall raise you byand by
on business to my brotherCassius.
So please you, we will stand andwatch your pleasure.
I will not have it so.
Lie down, good sirs.
It may be I shall otherwisebethink me.
Look Lucius, here's the book Isought for so;
I put it in the pocket of mygown.
I was sure your lordship did notgive it me.
Bear with me, good boy, I ammuch forgetful.
Canst thou hold up thy heavyeyes awhile,
and touch thy instrument astrain or two?
Ay, my lord, an't please you.
It does, my boy.
I trouble thee too much, butthou art willing.
It is my duty, sir.
I should not urge thy duty pastthy might;
I know young bloods look for atime of rest.
I have slept, my lord, already.
It was well done, and thou shaltsleep again;
I will not hold thee long.
If I do live, I will be good tothee.
This is a sleepy tune.
O murtherous slumber,
layest thou thy leaden mace uponmy boy that plays thee music?
Gentle knave, good night.
I will not do thee so much wrongto wake thee.
If thou dost nod, thou break'stthy instrument;
I'll take it from thee.
And, good boy, good night.
Let me see, let me see;
is not the leaf turn'd downwhere I left reading?
Here it is, I think.
How ill this taper burns.
Who comes here?
I think it is the weakness ofmine eyes
that shapes this monstrousapparition.
It comes upon me.
Art thou anything?
Art thou some god, some angel,or some devil
that makest my blood cold and myhair to stare?
Speak to me what thou art.
Thy evil spirit, Brutus.
Why comest thou?
To tell thee thou shalt see meat Philippi.
Well, then I shall see theeagain?
Ay, at Philippi.
Why, I will see thee at Philippithen.
Now I have taken heart thouvanishest.
Ill spirit, I would hold moretalk with thee.
Boy. Lucius.
Varro. Claudius.
Sirs, awake.
Claudius!
The strings, my lord, are false.
He thinks he still is at hisinstrument.
Lucius, awake.
My lord?
Didst thou dream, Lucius, thatthou so criedst out?
My lord, I do not know that Idid cry.
Yes, that thou didst.
Didst thou see anything?
Nothing, my lord.
Sleep again, Lucius.
Sirrah Claudius.
Fellow thou, awake.
My lord?
Why did you so cry out, sirs, inyour sleep?
- Did we, my lord? - Did we, mylord?
Ay, saw you anything?
No, my lord, I saw nothing.
Nor I, my lord.
Go and commend me to my brotherCassius;
bid him set on his powersbetimes before,
and we will follow.
It shall be done, my lord.